PD-1477 / 25.04 / Pd 1477 update nextcloud tutorial (#3183)
truenas/documentation: content/TruenasApps/StableApps/InstallNextCloudMedia.md

- software storage solutions
---

Nextcloud is a drop-in replacement for many popular cloud services, including file sharing, calendar, groupware, and more.
One of its more common uses for the home environment is serving as a media backup, and organizing and sharing service.
This procedure demonstrates how to set up Nextcloud on TrueNAS, and configure it to support hosting a wider variety of media file previews, including High Efficiency Image Container (HEIC), MP4, and MOV files.
The instructions in this article apply to TrueNAS 22.10.0 and later.

{{< include file="/static/includes/AppsUnversioned.md" >}}

## Before You Begin
Before you install the Nextcloud app:

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppsStableBeforeYouBegin.md" >}}

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppsBeforeYouBeginCertificate.md" >}}

> <p style="margin-left: 33px">Adding a certificate is optional but if you want to use a certificate for this application, either create a new self-signed CA and certificate or import an existing CA and create the certificate for Nextcloud. A certificate is not required to deploy the application.</p>

Author: I structured this snippet this way because certificates are required for some apps and optional for others. If I insert the (optional) in the bullet point I cannot use the same snippet in all app tutorials. I've modified the sentence to include (if required) at the end it.

  When adding the **postgres_data** dataset, enter the dataset name and then click **Advanced Options** to show the advanced dataset settings.
  Scroll down to the **ACL Type** and select **POSIX** from the dropdown list, and then click **Save**.
  Only the **postgres_data** dataset requires the POSIX ACL type setting.

  {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/SetPostgres_dataACLtoPOSIX.png" alt="Set postgres_data Dataset ACL Type" id="Set postgres_data Dataset ACL Type" >}}

  Click **Set ACL for this dataset** to open the **Edit ACL** screen.
  Set the **owner** and **group** to **netdata** and click **Apply Owner** and **Apply Group**, and then with that ACL entry highlighted, assign full control permissions before you save the ACL.

  {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/AddPostgres_DataACLPermissions.png" alt="Add Nextcloud postgres_data Dataset ACL Permissions" id="Add Nextcloud postgres_data Dataset ACL Permissions" >}}

  {{< /expand >}}

  Earlier versions of the Nextcloud app relied on four datasets.

>   If upgrading with an existing deployment of this application the app is migrated to the new configuration.

Author: I didn't want to include this in the before you begin section but there is no reason not to.

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AddMultipleAppInstancesAndNaming.md" >}}

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/LocateAndOpenInstallWizard.md" >}}

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudScreen.png" alt="Install Nextcloud Screen" id="Install Nextcloud Screen" >}}

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppsWizardAppNameAndVersion.md" >}}

Next, enter the **Nextcloud Configuration** settings.
{{< expand "Entering Nextcloud Configuration Settings" "v" >}}
For a basic installation, you can accept default values, but enter the following values:
Enter the name of the administration user in **Admin User** and **Admin Password**.
If using an existing Nextcloud account, enter the administration credentials for that account or enter new to create new Nextcloud user account credentials.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudConfig1.png" alt="Nextcloud Configuration Username" id="Nextcloud Configuration Username" >}}

Select the APT packages you want to use. Nextcloud requires ffmpeg and smbclient. Click **Add** to the right of **APT Packages** twice to add two sets of **Package** fields.
Select **ffmpeg** in one, and **smbclient** in the other.

> If also selecting **ocrmypdf**, also select the **Tesseract Language Codes** option you want to use. Click **Add** to show the **Language** field then select either **chi-sim** for simplified Chinese or **eng** for English.

Reviewer: On my system **Language** is just a text entry field, no dropdown with language options.

https://ocrmypdf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/languages.html#installing-additional-language-packs
Says that typically English is supported by default but you may have to install other language packs? Might want to check in with Stavros on how this field works and then link to either that page or https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract/blob/main/doc/tesseract.1.asc#languages for more on language choices.

> Enter the IP address and port for your TrueNAS system in **Host** as* ##.###.###.##:port#*. The **Data Directory Path** is pre-populated with the correct path.

Reviewer: Can be a FQDN:Port or IP:Port

Tooltip says 
>cloud.domain.com:30001
cloud.domain.com (if you use port 443 externally)
192.168.1.100:9001 (replace ip and port with your own)

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudConfig2.png" alt="Enter Host and Other Config Settings" id="Enter Host and Other Config Settings" >}}

Enter a password in **Redis Password** to create a new credential or enter the existing password if you already have Redis configured in your Nextcloud account.
Enter a password in **Database Password** to create a new credential for the Nextcloud database or enter the existing password if you already have the Nextcloud account database configured.

> Accept the remaining defaults, and if setting up a cron job schedule, select **Enabled** under **Cron** to show the settings to allow you to schedule a cron job.

Reviewer: "Accept the remaining defaults" is a little confusing, because it feels like that's it, I'm done setting up the app, but then we're really just eliding a few fields before talking about others that do need attention.

Author: changed this in the next commit

{{< expand "Nextcloud Cron Jobs" "v" >}}
NextCloud cron jobs only run while the app is running. If you stop the app, the cron job(s) do not run until you start the app again.

For more information on formatting and using cron jobs, see [Managing Cron Jobs]({{< relref "ManageCronJobsSCALE.md" >}}).
{{< /expand >}}

The TrueNAS app is configured with all the required environment variables, but if you want to further customize the container, click **Add** to the right of **Additional Environment Variables** for each to enter the variable(s) and values(s).
{{< /expand >}}
Enter the network configuration settings. 

> Enter the default port **30027** in **WebUI Port**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enter an open port number or accept the default port, **30027**, in **WebUI Port**.
This port must match the one used in **Host** above.
```

> If you configured a certificate, select it in **Certificate ID**. A certificate is required if you want to select a different external port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you configured a certificate, select it in **Certificate ID**. A certificate is required if you want to select an external port other than the default **30027**.
```

Enter the storage settings for each of the datasets created for the Nextcloud app.
{{< expand "Configuring Nextcloud Storage" "v" >}}
Do not select **DEPRECATED: Old Storage Structure** if you are deploying Nextcloud for the first time as this slows down the installation and is not necessary.
If you are upgrading where your Nextcloud deployment in TrueNAS was a 1.x.x release, select this option.
  
Set **Host Path (Path that already exists on the system)** in **Type** for **Nextcloud AppData Storage**.
Select **Enable ACL**, and then either enter or browse to and select the **html** dataset to populate the **Host Path** field.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudStorageAppDataACLandACESettings.png" alt="Add Nextcloud Storage for AppData" id="Add Nextcloud Storage for AppData" >}}

> Select **Add** to the right of **ACL Entries**, add the **1001** user, and give it **FULL_CONTROL Access**.

Reviewer: Image shows **Force Flag** selected and it is not mentioned in the text. Same for the next dataset.

Repeat this step for the **Nextcloud User Data Storage** storage volume.
After setting **Type** to **Host Path (Path that already exists on the system)** and selecting **Enable ACL**, enter or browse to and select the **data** dataset.
Select **Add** to the right of **ACL Entries** to add the **1001** user, and give it **FULL_CONTROL Access**.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudStorageDataACLandACESettings.png" alt="Add Nextcloud Storage Volumes" id="Add Nextcloud Storage Volumes" >}}

Finally, set **Type** to **Host Path (Path that already exists on the system)** under **Nextcloud Postgres Data Storage**.
Do not select **Enable ACL**!
Either enter or browse to and select the **postgres_data** dataset to populate the **Host Path** field. Do not add an ACE entry for this dataset using the app installation wizard.
ACL permissions are set for this dataset in the [Before You Begin](#before-you-begin) section in the **Configure Nextcoud Dataset ACLs** expandable section.
{{< /expand >}}

> Accept the defaults in **Resources Configuration**, and select the GPU option if your system has a GPU installed.

Reviewer: Maybe just

```suggestion
Accept the defaults in **Resources Configuration**, and select the GPU option if applicable.
```

They might have a GPU installed but not want it allocated to Nextcloud.

Click **Install**. A progress dialog displays before switching to the **Installed** applications screen.
The **Installed** screen displays with the **nextcloud** app in the **Deploying** state. Status changes to **Running** when ready to use.

Click **Web Portal** on the **Application Info** widget to open the Nextcloud web portal sign-in screen.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/NextcloudSignInScreen.png" alt="Nextcloud Sign In Screen" id="Nextcloud Sign In Screen" >}}

## Understanding App Installation Wizard Settings
The following section provides more detailed explanations of the settings in each section of the **Install** installation wizard.

### Application Name Settings

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppsWizardAppNameAndVersion.md" >}}

### Configuration Settings

> Nextcloud configuration settings include setting up credentials, ACT packages previously referred to as the commands, the host IP and port, data directory path, upload limits, execution times, memory limits and cache memory consumption, and adding a cron job with schedule, or adding additional environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nextcloud configuration settings include setting up credentials, ACT packages (previously referred to as the commands), the host IP and port, data directory path, upload limits, execution times, memory limits and cache memory consumption, adding a cron job with schedule, and adding additional environment variables.
```

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/InstallAppsStorageConfig.md" >}}

Nextcloud needs three datasets for host path storage volume configurations:
* **html** to use as the **AppData** storage volume.
* **data** to use as the **User Data** storage volume.
* **postgres_data** to use as the **Postgres Data** storage volume.

If you group these datasets under a parent dataset named *nextcloud*, configure the [ACL permissions]({{< relref "PermissionsSCALE.md" >}}) for this parent dataset and add an ACE entry for the **netdata** user.

The app installation wizard cannot set up the ACL type or correctly add user permissions for the postgres storage volume.
You must configure these outside the install wizard using the **Add Dataset** and **Edit ACL** screens.
When adding the **postgres_data** dataset set it up with a POSIX ACL, and add the **netdata** user as the owner user and group with full control permissions.

See the instructions provided in the [Before You Begin](#before-you-begin) section for instructions on creating both the parent and postgres_data datasets and configuring the ACL permissions for each.

{{< expand "Earlier Nextcloud Deployment Datasets" "v" >}}

> Earlier deployments of the Nextcloud app used five datasets, the parent dataset for the application (**nextcloud**) and the four child datasets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Earlier deployments of the Nextcloud app use five datasets, the parent dataset for the application (**nextcloud**) and the four child datasets:
```

The instructions in this article apply to TrueNAS 22.10.0 and later.

{{< include file="/static/includes/AppsUnversioned.md" >}}

## Before You Begin
Before you install the Nextcloud app:

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppsStableBeforeYouBegin.md" >}}

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppsBeforeYouBeginCertificate.md" >}}

<p style="margin-left: 33px">Adding a certificate is optional but if you want to use a certificate for this application, either create a new self-signed CA and certificate or import an existing CA and create the certificate for Nextcloud. A certificate is not required to deploy the application.</p>

* Go to **Datasets** and select the pool or dataset where you want to place the Nextcloud dataset.
  For example, */tank/apps/nextcloud* or */tank/nextcloud*.
  You can use either an existing pool or [create a new one]({{< relref "CreatePoolWizard.md" >}}).

  [Create the three dataset(s)]({{< relref "DatasetsSCALE.md" >}}) before beginning the app installation process.

>   Nextcloud uses **html** for app data, **data** for app data, and **postgres_data** for the postgres storage volume.

Reviewer 2: html for app data
data for **user** data
postgres_data for **database** data

  {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/AddNextcloudParentDatasetNetdataUserACL.png" alt="Add Nextcloud Parent Dataset ACL Permissions" id="Add Nextcloud Parent Dataset ACL Permissions" >}}

  When adding the **postgres_data** dataset, enter the dataset name and then click **Advanced Options** to show the advanced dataset settings.
  Scroll down to the **ACL Type** and select **POSIX** from the dropdown list, and then click **Save**.
  Only the **postgres_data** dataset requires the POSIX ACL type setting.

  {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/SetPostgres_dataACLtoPOSIX.png" alt="Set postgres_data Dataset ACL Type" id="Set postgres_data Dataset ACL Type" >}}

  Click **Set ACL for this dataset** to open the **Edit ACL** screen.
  Set the **owner** and **group** to **netdata** and click **Apply Owner** and **Apply Group**, and then with that ACL entry highlighted, assign full control permissions before you save the ACL.
  Click **Save Access Control List**.

  {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/AddPostgres_DataACLPermissions.png" alt="Add Nextcloud postgres_data Dataset ACL Permissions" id="Add Nextcloud postgres_data Dataset ACL Permissions" >}}

  {{< /expand >}}

> {{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppBeforeYouBeginNewUser.md" >}}

Reviewer 2: Is this intended to be here? Its also on the top. But still feels weird to be here.

Author: Yes, this is the instruction for creating a new user. The similar name of the snippet file might be throwing you off. ;-)

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudScreen.png" alt="Install Nextcloud Screen" id="Install Nextcloud Screen" >}}

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppsWizardAppNameAndVersion.md" >}}

Next, enter the **Nextcloud Configuration** settings.
{{< expand "Entering Nextcloud Configuration Settings" "v" >}}
For a basic installation, you can accept default values, but enter the following values:
Enter the name of the administration user in **Admin User** and **Admin Password**.
If using an existing Nextcloud account, enter the administration credentials for that account or enter new to create new Nextcloud user account credentials.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudConfig1.png" alt="Nextcloud Configuration Username" id="Nextcloud Configuration Username" >}}

Select the APT packages you want to use. Nextcloud requires ffmpeg and smbclient. Click **Add** to the right of **APT Packages** twice to add two sets of **Package** fields.
Select **ffmpeg** in one, and **smbclient** in the other.
If also selecting **ocrmypdf**, also set the **Tesseract Language Codes** option to use.

> Click **Add** to show the **Language** field then enter either **chi-sim** for simplified Chinese or **eng** for English.

Reviewer 2: Hmm UI does not seem to display my description (tooltip). I'll open an issue for that.
But here is the description, feel free to copy what needed to adapt docs.

```yaml
          description: |
            The tesseract languages to install for OCRmypdf.</br>
            See a list of language codes here https://tesseract-ocr.github.io/tessdoc/Data-Files-in-different-versions.html.</br>
            Typing a wrong language code will block the container from starting.</br>
            Only takes effect if ocrmypdf is selected above.
            ```

Author: Added the information provided in the Nextcloud Configuration Settings section.

See [Network Configuration](#network-configuration) below for more information on changing the default port.
This port must match the one used in **Host** above.

If you configured a certificate, select it in **Certificate ID**. A certificate is required if you want to select an external port other than the default **30027**.

Enter the storage settings for each of the datasets created for the Nextcloud app.
{{< expand "Configuring Nextcloud Storage" "v" >}}
Do not select **DEPRECATED: Old Storage Structure** if you are deploying Nextcloud for the first time as this slows down the installation and is not necessary.
If you are upgrading where your Nextcloud deployment in TrueNAS was a 1.x.x release, select this option.
  
Set **Host Path (Path that already exists on the system)** in **Type** for **Nextcloud AppData Storage**.
Select **Enable ACL**, and then either enter or browse to and select the **html** dataset to populate the **Host Path** field.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudStorageAppDataACLandACESettings.png" alt="Add Nextcloud Storage for AppData" id="Add Nextcloud Storage for AppData" >}}

> Select **Add** to the right of **ACL Entries**, add the **1001** user, and give it **FULL_CONTROL Access**.

Reviewer 2: 1001 is not correct here.
Nextcloud runs as root, but the subprocess of nextcloud runs as `33/www-data` 
So either no ACLs are needed, or use 33/www-data 
(nextcloud will _attempt_ to fix the permissions itself on the first install in either case. we dont control that)

Author: About user ID **1001** in the Nextcloud tutorial, I found this UID in the questions.yml file and using it does not prevent deploying the app. Should I say to enter this or **0** for root user? We don't enter the string the way you provided it 33/www-data, so I guess it would be just **33** entered as the ACE entry UID.  I can also provide the instructions to add this user from the Edit ACL screen like it is for the postgres_data dataset.

Reviewer 2: Its possible 1001 was a typo. But its no longer there on docker apps!

33 is better yes, tho nextcloud will still attempt to fix perms on install.

Author: changed 1001 to 33

Select **Force Flag**.

Repeat this step for the **Nextcloud User Data Storage** storage volume.
After setting **Type** to **Host Path (Path that already exists on the system)** and selecting **Enable ACL**, enter or browse to and select the **data** dataset.

> Select **Add** to the right of **ACL Entries** to add the **1001** user, and give it **FULL_CONTROL Access**. Select **Force Flag**

Reviewer 2: not 1001

If you have an existing Nextcloud account add the credentials for that account in the **Admin User** and **Admin Password** fields.
If you do not have an existing account enter the name and password you want to use to create the Nextcloud login credentials.

{{< expand "Adding APT Packages" "v" >}}
Nextcloud has three APT package options:
* **ffmpeg**
* **smbclient**
* **ocrmypdf**

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudConfigAPTPackageOptions.png" alt="Configure Nextcloud APT Packages" id="Configure Nextcloud APT Packages" >}}

You must add both the **ffmpeg** and **smbclient** packages to deploy this app.
You can use **ocrmypdf** as well if needed, but you must also select the **Tesseract Language Code** to use. Options are **chi-sim** for Simplified Chinese or **eng** for English.
Click **Add** to the right of **APT Packages** for each option you want or need to add.
{{< /expand >}}
To configure the host, enter the IP address for the TrueNAS system where you install the Nextcloud app and the web port number separated by a colon. For example, <i>12.123.12.3</i><b>:30027</b>.

> **30027** is the default port assigned to the TrueNAS Nextcloud app deployment. See [Network Configuration](#network-configuration) for more information on this port assignment and how to change it if so desired.

Reviewer 2: Dont we have this section above?
Also there is a screenshot of nextcloud at login page, but then we go again over installation settings?

Repeat this two more times to add the other child datasets to the **nextcloud** parent dataset.
When finished you should have the **nextcloud** parent dataset with three child datasets under it. Our example paths are:
* */mnt/tank/nextcloud/***html**
* */mnt/tank/nextcloud/***data**
* */mnt/tank/nextcloud/***postgres_data**

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/AppsAddNextcloudDatasets.png" alt="Add Nextcloud Storage" id="Add Nextcloud Storage" >}}
{{< /expand >}}

#### ACL and ACE Settings

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppInstallWizardACLConfiguration.md" >}}

#### Mounting an SMB Share
TrueNAS **Additional Storage** options include the ability to mount an SMB share inside the container pod.

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppWizardStorageSMBOption.md" >}}

### Resource Configuration

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudResourcesConfig.png" alt="Resources Configuration Settings" id="Resources Configuration Settings" >}}

{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppInstallWizardResourceConfig.md" >}}
{{< include file="/static/includes/apps/AppsInstallWizardGPUPassthrough.md" >}}

## Troubleshooting Tips

> {{< hint type=info title="Update pre v. 2.0.4 Nextcloud Installations">}}

Reviewer 2: Not touched in this PR, but we might need to clarify that this was about Dragonfish only.

Author: I'll remove this section. the 24.04 docs has the old tutorial with this content so it is still available in that branch.

Next, enter the **Nextcloud Configuration** settings.
{{< expand "Entering Nextcloud Configuration Settings" "v" >}}
For a basic installation, you can accept default values, but enter the following values:
Enter the name of the administration user in **Admin User** and **Admin Password**.
If using an existing Nextcloud account, enter the administration credentials for that account or enter new to create new Nextcloud user account credentials.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Apps/InstallNextcloudConfig1.png" alt="Nextcloud Configuration Username" id="Nextcloud Configuration Username" >}}

Select the APT packages you want to use. Nextcloud requires ffmpeg and smbclient. Click **Add** to the right of **APT Packages** twice to add two sets of **Package** fields.
Select **ffmpeg** in one, and **smbclient** in the other.
If also selecting **ocrmypdf**, also set the **Tesseract Language Codes** option to use.
Click **Add** to show the **Language** field then enter either **chi-sim** for simplified Chinese or **eng** for English.
See [Nextcloud Configuration Settings](#nextcloud-configuration-settings) below for more information.

> Enter either the fully qualified domain name or the IP address and port for your TrueNAS system in **Host** as *##.###.###.##:port#* or *my.domain.com:port#*.

Reviewer: I think the # has the potential to add confusion rather than help

```suggestion
Enter either the fully qualified domain name or the IP address and port for your TrueNAS system in **Host** as *##.###.###.##:port* or *my.domain.com:port*.
```

{{< expand "Nextcloud Cron Jobs" "v" >}}
NextCloud cron jobs only run while the app is running. If you stop the app, the cron job(s) do not run until you start the app again.

For more information on formatting and using cron jobs, see [Managing Cron Jobs]({{< relref "ManageCronJobsSCALE.md" >}}).
{{< /expand >}}

The TrueNAS app is configured with all the required environment variables, but if you want to further customize the container, click **Add** to the right of **Additional Environment Variables** for each to enter the variable(s) and values(s).
{{< /expand >}}
Enter the network configuration settings. 
Enter the default port, **30027**, in **WebUI Port**, or enter an available port number of your choice.
See [Network Configuration](#network-configuration) below for more information on changing the default port.
This port must match the one used in **Host** above.

If you configured a certificate, select it in **Certificate ID**. A certificate is required if you want to select an external port other than the default **30027**.

Enter the storage settings for each of the datasets created for the Nextcloud app.
{{< expand "Configuring Nextcloud Storage" "v" >}}

> Do not select **DEPRECATED: Old Storage Structure** if you are deploying Nextcloud for the first time as this slows down the installation and is not necessary.
> If you are upgrading where your Nextcloud deployment in TrueNAS was a 1.x.x release, select this option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< hint type=info >}}
Do not select **DEPRECATED: Old Storage Structure** if you are deploying Nextcloud for the first time as this slows down the installation and is not necessary.
If you are upgrading where your Nextcloud deployment in TrueNAS was a 1.x.x release, select this option.
{{< /hint >}}
```

4. Click **Save Access Control List**.

> Finally, add the user **netdata** and group **docker** (999:999) to the **Postgres Data** and **Postgres Backup** datasets, following the same process.

Reviewer 2: There isn't a postgres backup dataset anymore

> Within the Nextcloud container, the user and group 999 map to **postgres**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Within the Postgres container, the user and group 999 map to **postgres**.
```
